# TiKV API V2

## Motivation

`API V2` is a set of breaking changes that aim to solve serval issues with current RawKV (hereafter referred to as `API V1`):

1. RawKV is not safe to use along with TxnKV. By solving this, TiDB will be able to support RawKV as the table's storage engine, which will enrich TiDB's use cases.
2. RawKV TTL is controlled by Store configuration. Switching the configuration will cause data corruption in silence.
3. RawKV TTL is encoded into the value by appending 8-bytes UNIX timestamp to the end of the value, therefore it's hard to introduce other encode afterward.
4. It could be nice if we can deploy multiple applications on one TiKV cluster.

## Detailed Design

### New key-value codec

This RFC introduces a new key encode to RawKV and TxnKV, and a new value encode to RawKV, which will allow the RawKV to be used along with TxnKV and also allow TiKV to flexibly add meta, e.g. the TTL, to a RawKV value.

In addition, keys will be contained in keyspaces, where the keys in different keyspace are totally independant. If keyspace is not specified, the keyspace 'default' will be used.

The `API V2` is enabled by a switch on PD. Since it changes the storage encode, it will be not compatible to switch between `API V1` and `API V2` while there are non-TiDB data in TiKV. TiDB data is specially treated in order to not be affected by the change.

#### Key Encode

Once the `API V2` is enabled, the key will be starting with either:

1. `m` and `t`: TxnKV key that will only be used by TiDB.
2. `x{keyspace prefix id}`: TxnKV key.
3. `r{keyspace prefix id}`: RawKV key.

The `{keyspace prefix id}` is the [keyspace](https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/pull/39) prefix for seperating keys of different keyspace. It should be an vary-length integer whose highest bit of every byte denotes whether the next byte is still part of the integer. The client will fetch the prefix from PD by the keyspace name specified by the user when initializing the client, so it means that the keyspace prefix is valid during the session, in other words, the change on keyspace on PD will not take effect on running seesions.

`x`, `r` are mode prefixes that indicates the mode the key is belonging to. The mode prefix is ahead of the keyspace id so that TiKV and clients are able to quickly check the mode without parsing the keyspace id in varint format.

Note that in TxnKV, the key will be encoded by `Memory Comparable Encoding`. But since the `Memory Comparable Encoding` will not change the starting bytes but only add paddings, there won't be any overlap between RawKV and TxnKV.

#### RawKV Value Encode

If the key has RawKV prefix `r`, then the value can be either:

1. `{0x0}{data}`
2. `{0x1}{TTL expire timestamp}{data}`

### Keyspace Management

Add a new http interface to PD for adding, renaming, deleteing and querying the mapping from keyspace name to prefix id:

```javascript
// list all keyspaces
GET /keyspaces
[
  {
    "name": "default",
    "id": "0",
    "created_at": "2021-12-12"
  },
  {
    "name": "foo",
    "id": "1",
    "created_at": "2021-12-12"
  }
]

// list a keyspace
GET /keyspaces/foo
{
 "name": "default",
 "id": "0",
 "created_at": "2021-12-12"
}

// add a new keyspace
POST /keyspaces
{
  "name": "foo",
  "id": "1",
}

// delete a keyspace
DELETE /keyspaces/{keyspace_name}

// Get all deleted keyspaces
GET /keyspaces?type=deleted
[
  {
    "name": "default",
    "id": "0",
    "created_at": "2021-12-12",
    "deleted_at": "2021-12-12"
  }
]
```

The keyspaces are stored in pd and has no limitation on the id number.

1. Adding keyspace: newly added keyspaces can only be viable to new clients.
2. Deleting keyspace:<br />
  2.1. Deleting keyspace only marks the metadata to inviable in PD, the data in the keyspace and metadata in PD will not be deleted automatically. Garbage collecting the data in deleted keyspaces may be introduced in the future since it increases the complexity of this RFC. To ensure no data is left, the user should clean up the keyspace before deleting the keyspace at present.<br />
  2.2. Every client syncs the keyspace information with the PD leader every 5 minutes. When a keyspace is deleted, the client should be aware of the deletion in 5 minutes. The keyspace can not be accessed by any living client after 5 minutes.

#### pd-ctl

To enable API V2, which also enables the keyspace API:

```bash
>> config set api-version 2
```

To manage keyspace:

```bash
>> config keyspaces show [--deleted]
[
  {
     name: string,
     id: int64,
     created_at: timestamp
  }
]

>> config keyspaces create <keyspace name> [--id <Keyspace ID>]
>> config keyspaces delete <keyspace name>
>> config keyspaces flashback [<new keyspace name>]
```


### How to safely enable API V2

#### Upgrade

Upgrade from `API V1` to `API V2` is a simple process:

1. Update TiKV, TiDB, and PD to the version that supports `API V2`.
2. Ensure that all the keys in TiKV are written by TiDB, which are prefixed with `m` or `t`. Delete if any. Or else the step 4 will fail.
3. Use `pd-ctl` to enable `API V2`.
4. Enable `API V2` in TiKV config file and restart TiKV (User should take the responsibility to offline all tikv clients excluding TiDB. Or set by online config change API (Not proposed in this RFC, but is good to have).

#### Downgrade

Downgrade from `API V2` to `API V1` is also simple:

1. Ensure that all the keys in TiKV are written by TiDB, which are prefixed with `m` or `t`. Delete if any.
2. Use `pd-ctl` to disable `API V2`.
3. Disable `API V2` in TiKV config file and restart TiKV (User should take the responsibility to offline all tikv clients excluding TiDB). Or set by online config change API (Not proposed in this RFC, but is good to have).

#### Data migration

It's reasonable to provide a way to import and export non-TiDB data in TiKV during the upgrade or downgrade. On TiKV before 4.0, the only way to do that is `scan` and `batch_put` on the client. After 4.0, TiKV start to support importing SST file into TxnKV, and after 5.1, importing on RawKV is also supported. You can find more information in [`RFC: Online Bulk Load for RawKV`](https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/pull/72).

## Implementation Details

### PD

#### Data structure in `etcd`
  - Keyspace id: path: `/pd/keyspace_next_id`, integer value, starting from `1`.
  - Keyspaces: path: `/keyspaces/{name}`, value: `{ "id": <keyspace id>, "created_at": "2021-12-12" }`.
  - Deleted keyspaces: path: `/keyspaces_deleted/{id}_{name}`, same value as normal keyspace.

#### Add New Keyspace
1. Check uniqueness of keyspace name in local cache.
2. Acquire a new `/pd/keyspace_next_id`.
```sh
➜ get /pd/keyspace_next_id
1
➜ txn: cmp: val("/pd/keyspace_next_id" = "1", then put /pd/keyspace_next_id 2
```

3. Add new keyspace.
```sh
➜ txn: cmp: create("/keyspaces/feature-store") = "0", then put /keyspaces/feature-store {"id":1}
```

#### Get Deleted Keyspace
```sh
➜ get /keyspaces_deleted/ --prefix --sort-by="CREATE" --order="DESCEND"
[{"key":"/keyspaces/1_feature-store","value":"{\"id\":1}"}]
```

### PD Recover

Add a new parameter `keyspace_next_id` besides `cluster_id` and `alloc_id`.

#### Limitations
* Maximum number of keyspaces is `10000`, to keep efficiency. Add new keyspace will fail if exceed this limitation.
* Maximum number of deleted keyspaces is `100`, to limit storage size usage. Leader loop will clean deleted keyspaces exceed this limitation.

### TiKV Server

In TiKV config file, add a new configuration `storage.api_version`.

In kvdb, add a store meta `DataEncode` which has two varient `V1` and `V2`. When the store meta mismatches the config `storage.api_version`, it means that the user is switching the data encoding, then TiKV should check that there is no non-TiDB data in stoarge, and then save the new data encode in store meta.

In kvproto message `SSTMeta`, add `DataEncode`. Reject the ingesting SST file if the version is mismatched.

In TiKV gRPC's context, add a field `api_version`.

If `storage.api_version=2`:

- Use the new value encode in `RawStore`, `TTLStore` and `sst_importer`.

- Only allow RawKV to access `default` CF.

- If the request's context has `api_version=1`:
  - Reject the request unless it's a TxnKV request and the keys starting with `m` or `t`.

- If the request's context has `api_version=2`:
  - Only allow the key that has RawKV prefix for RawKV requests.
  - Only allow the key that has TxnKV prefix for TxnKV requests.

If `storage.api_version=1`:

- Reject all requests with `api_version=2` in the context.

### TiKV Client

Provide two modes for users:

- V2:
  - Fetch keyspace prefix by keyspace name from PD and then prepend `x{keyspace prefix}` on TxnKV keys or prepend `r{keyspace prefix}` on RawKV keys.
  - Set `api_version=2` in TiKV gRPC's `Context`.
  - Disallow specify CF in `RawClient`.
  - Allow user to specify a keyspace for a session of `RawClient` or `TxnCient`. Default keyspace is named `default`.
  - Fetch keyspace information from PD every 5 mins. Destory the client session if the keyspace it's using is deleted.

- V1:
  - Behaves jusk like current client.
  - Set `api_version=1` in TiKV gRPC's `Context`.

Listed below is the compatibility matrix:

|              | V1 Server | V2 Server |
| ------------ | --------- | --------- |
| V1 RawClient | Raw Data  | Forbidden |
| V1 TxnClient | Txn Data  | TiDB Data |
| V2 RawClient | Forbidden | Raw Data  |
| V2 TxnClient | Forbidden | Txn Data  |

### CDC / BR

Since all access to TiDB is unchanged during the upgrade, CDC and BR should work the same after upgrade/downgrade.

### tikv-ctl

Read `api_version` in kvdb and decode data using the corresponding version.

### TiDB

Upgrade to the latest TiKV Go Client and use `V1` mode.

## Unresolved questions
