# Summary

This RFC proposes a new thread pool that supports async operations, which is
called `ReadPool`. It is designed to be specifically used for all sorts of read
operations like Kv Get, Kv Scan and Coprocessor Read to improve performance.

# Motivation

Currently, for all KV operations that stay inside `Storage`, they are executed
on the same thread pool. This leads to bad operation isolation, i.e. heavy
writes will cause slow reads. In fact, these read operations can be executed on
other  threads to be not blocked. For Coprocessor operations, we have an
end-point worker thread to handle async snapshots. This is a bottleneck when
there are heavy coprocessor requests.

By introducing a standalone thread pool that supports async operations (which
is called ReadPool) in this RFC, we can fix both problems. For KV operations,
read and write operations will be executed on different thread pools, so that
they won't affect each other. For Coprocessor operations, since ReadPool
supports async operations, the end-point worker is not necessary anymore and
the bottleneck no longer exists.

In this RFC, there will be a ReadPool for KV operations and another ReadPool
for Coprocessor operations, so that they won't block each other. In the future,
it may be possible to merge them together.

# Detailed design

The ReadPool provides these features:

1. Support different priorities (high, normal and low).

2. Support contexts and periodical ticking so that we can use local metrics.

3. Support max task threshold as a load control mechanism.

The ReadPool can be implemented via 2 levels. The lower level is a new facility
called `util::FuturePool`, which is a simple encapsulation over
[CpuPool](https://docs.rs/futures-cpupool/) that supports feature 2. The higher
level is `server::ReadPool`, which assembles multiple `FuturePool`s and
supports features 1 and 3. In this way, `FuturePool` becomes a common facility
that can be reused in the future to run other kinds of async operations that
need contexts, not just limited to the scenario listed in this RFC.

## FuturePool

To support periodical ticking, this RFC defines:

```rust
pub trait Context: fmt::Debug + Send {
    fn on_tick(&mut self) {}
}
```

The `FuturePool` user can provide customized `impl Context` so that some code
can be executed periodically within the context of the thread pool's thread.

The `FuturePool` is defined as follows:

```rust
pub struct FuturePool<T: Context + 'static> {
    pool: CpuPool,
    context: Arc<HashMap<thread::ThreadId, T>>
    running_task_count: Arc<AtomicUsize>,
    ……
}
```

The logic of whether to call `on_tick` is, when each task finishes running, we
check how much time has elapsed. If the elapsed time since the last tick is
longer than our tick interval, we call `on_tick`. In order to do so in a clean
way, we can wrap this logic into a `ContextDelegator`:

```rust
struct ContextDelegator<T: Context> {
    tick_interval: Duration,
    inner: RefCell<T>,
    last_tick: Cell<Option<Instant>>,
}

impl<T: Context> ContextDelegator<T> {
    fn new(context: T, tick_interval: Duration) -> ContextDelegator<T> {
        // ...
    }

    fn on_task_finish(&self) {
        // check and optionally call `self.inner.borrow_mut().on_tick()`
    }
}
```

`FuturePool` users should pass a `Future` to the `FuturePool` to execute, just
like `CpuPool`. However, to obtain access to the `Context` inside `Future`, the
provided `Future` should be wrapped in a closure which provides access to the
`Context` via the parameter. In the further, the parameter may live multiple
`Future`s, which may run on different threads and different `Context`s. Thus,
the parameter is a `Context` accessor instead of a specific `Context`.

As a result, this RFC further introduces the following struct, which provides
an access to the current `Context` based on running thread:

```rust
pub struct ContextDelegators<T: Context> {
    ...
}

impl<T: Context> ContextDelegators<T> {
    pub fn current_thread_context_mut(&self) -> RefMut<T> {
        ……
    }
}
```

The `FuturePool` provides `spawn` interface to execute a `Future` while
providing
`ContextDelegators`:

```rust
impl<T: Context + 'static> FuturePool<T> {
    pub fn spawn<F, R>(&self, future_factory: R) -> CpuFuture<F::Item, F::Error>
    where
        R: FnOnce(ContextDelegators<T>) -> F + Send + 'static,
        F: Future + Send + 'static,
        F::Item: Send + 'static,
        F::Error: Send + 'static,
    {
        ……
    }
}
```

## ReadPool

`ReadPool` is implemented over `FuturePool` as follows:

```rust
pub struct ReadPool<T: Context + 'static> {
    pool_high: FuturePool<T>,
    pool_normal: FuturePool<T>,
    pool_low: FuturePool<T>,
    max_tasks_high: usize,
    max_tasks_normal: usize,
    max_tasks_low: usize,
}
```

It also provides an interface similar to `FuturePool::spawn`, which specifies
the priority and returns an error when `FuturePool` is full:

```rust
pub enum Priority {
    Normal,
    Low,
    High,
}

impl<T: futurepool::Context + 'static> ReadPool<T> {
    pub fn future_execute<F, R>(
        &self,
        priority: Priority,
        future_factory: R,
    ) -> Result<CpuFuture<F::Item, F::Error>, Full>
    where
        R: FnOnce(ContextDelegators<T>) -> F + Send + 'static,
        F: Future + Send + 'static,
        F::Item: Send + 'static,
        F::Error: Send + 'static,
    {
        let pool = self.get_pool_by_priority(priority);
        let max_tasks = self.get_max_tasks_by_priority(priority);
        let current_tasks = pool.get_running_task_count();
        if current_tasks >= max_tasks {
            Err(Full {
                current_tasks,
                max_tasks,
            })
        } else {
            Ok(pool.spawn(future_factory))
        }
    }
}
```

# Drawbacks

The `on_tick` implementation in `FuturePool` is not perfect. It is driven by
task completion, which means it will not be executed when there is no task.
This is acceptable since we are going to use `on_tick` to report metrics.

# Alternatives

We can implement our own future pool instead of utilizing `CpuPool`. In this
way, we can have a true `on_tick`. However, this is complex and is not a
necessary feature we need.

We can implement our own async model instead of utilizing `Future`. However,
there is no benefits compared to the current solution.

# Unresolved questions

None.
