text/2019-11-13-follower-replication.md, before:

# Follower Replication

## Summary

This RFC introduces a new mechanism for Raft protocol which allows a follower to send raft logs and snapshots to other followers. The target of this feature is to reduce network transmission cost between different data centers in Log Replication.

## Motivation

In the origin Raft protocol, a follower can only receive raft logs and snapshots from its leader, which could be insufficient in some situations. For example, when a Raft group is distributed in different data centers, log replication between a new node and the leader could be expensive if they are in different data centers. In this case, internal follower-to-follower transfer in one data center can be far more efficient than the traditionally stipulated leader-to-follower transfer. And in a cluster with massive nodes, the leader can have lower system load due to the less operations in network transmission.

## Detailed design

There are four key concepts of design:

- Every peer in a Raft group is associated with a `group_id`.
- Follower-to-follower data transfer is only allowed for peers in same group.
- Peers report their `group_id` to their leader by Raft messages.
- Leader is able to ask a follower to replicate data to other followers.

### The Group and Groups

We introduce a new concept *group* that represents all the raft nodes in a data center and any node which belongs to the group can be called a *group member*. Every raft node should have a new configuration called *Groups* which contains all the groups as the name is. For example, in a 2DC based raft cluster with 5 nodes ABCDE where A, B, and C are at DC1 and  DE are at DC2, the `Groups` might be organized like:

```
Group1: [A, B, C]
Group2: [D, E]
```

The leader must be easy to know whether or not nodes belong to the same group or get all the group members. Since `Groups` is a configuration that will never be persistent in Storage and is volatile, a raft node exposes the ability to modify it on the fly with the benefit of flexibility on the upper layer.

### The Delegate and Commission

As the `Groups` is configured, the leader is able to choose a group member as a *delegate* to send entries to one or the rest group members in Log Replication, which is called Follower Replication. To implement Follower Replication, we basically need three main steps:

1. The leader picks a group member as a delegate of the group.
2. When processing Log Replication to a delegate, the leader must specify peers whom the delegate should replicate logs to. And the leader never sends raft log to the specified peers.
3. The delegate replicates entries to specified peers based on its own progress.

Here is a diagram showing how Follower Replication works:

```
                                        +-----------+
                                        |           |
       +--------------------------------+     C     |
       |           MsgAppendResp        |           |
       |                                +-----^-----+
       |                                      |
       |                                      |  MsgAppend(e[4,5])
       |                                      |
+------v-----+                          +-----+-----+
|            |                          |           |
|   leader   +-------------------------->     B     | delegate
|            |   MsgAppend {            |           |
+------^-----+     e[2,5]               +-----+-----+
       |           BcastTargets [C, D]        |
       |         }                            |  MsgAppend(e[3,5])
       |                                      |
       |                                +-----v-----+
       |                                |           |
       +--------------------------------+     D     |
                   MsgAppendResp        |           |
                                        +-----------+

```

Note:

- `e[x, y]` stands for all the entries within an index range [x, y] (both inclusive)
- `BcastTargets` is a name list of delegated peers.

#### Choose a Delegate

Since a delegate is responsible to send entries to other group members, it must contain entries as more as possible to complete the commission. The leader follows a bunch of rules to choose a delegate of a group:

1. If all the members are requiring snapshots, choose the delegate randomly.
2. Among the members who are requiring new entries, choose the node satisfies conditions below:

    1. The progress has the maximal `match_index`.

3. If no delegate is picked, the leader does Log Replication itself. Especially, if a group contains the leader it self, no delegate will be set. And the feature of enabling choosing delegate of such 'leader group' can be controlled by upper layer.

If the delegate of a group is determined, it’ll be cached in memory for later usage until Groups configuration is changed or the delegate is evicted by rejection message. And the flow control should be valid for any cached delegate.

#### How delegate does replication

We can add a new field into `Message`: `BcastTargets`, which is a list of peer IDs that the message receiver (the delegate) needs to replicate entries to. When a peer become delegate first time, it doesn't know followers' progress, so it appends its last log entry to other peers. After it receives `MsgAppendResponse` from those peers, it can update their progresses.

You can just treat a commission as the metadata of a MsgAppend or MsgSnapshot since the `last_index` and `log_term` are set by the leader according to its progress set.

Peers can know whether a `MsgAppend` comes from a delegate or the leader according to `delegate` value in the message. If a peer receives a `MsgAppend` from a delegate, it needs to response to both the leader and the delegate to sync the `Progress` on them.

## Drawbacks

1. Committing speed could be slow if `quorum` must involve peers in different data center.
2. When handling a Raft message, a hashmap query to get a peer's group and delegate is introduced.
3. When a delegate is dismissed due to networking partition, the leader recovers processing Log Replication to peers in the delegate's group. But the information in `Inflights` on the delegate won't be extended by the leader. Therefore, at that time, the leader starts to send messages with a plain `Inflights`, which breaks the origin flow control. And vice versa in the situation where the leader picks a delegate.

## Alternatives

In the current design, the leader not only let the delegate replicate logs to other peers but also 'delegate's the whole flow control to the delegate. We can benefit from it because of the lighter cross-data-center network transmission between the leader and peers but suffer from some issues described in **Drawbacks** section.

There is an alternative design that the leader doesn't 'delegate' the flow control to the delegate. When the leader sends `BcastTargets` to the delegate, it adds the `last_index` of each member in `BcastTargets` to indicate the peer's progress from the leader's view. In this way, the messaging flow is always controlled by the leader and the `Inflights` in-consistency can be avoided.

## Unresolved questions

Commit message:

add compatibility section
Signed-off-by: Fullstop000 <fullstop1005@gmail.com>

text/2019-11-13-follower-replication.md, after:

# Follower Replication

## Summary

This RFC introduces a new mechanism for Raft protocol which allows a follower to send raft logs and snapshots to other followers. The target of this feature is to reduce network transmission cost between different data centers in Log Replication.

## Motivation

In the origin Raft protocol, a follower can only receive raft logs and snapshots from its leader, which could be insufficient in some situations. For example, when a Raft group is distributed in different data centers, log replication between a new node and the leader could be expensive if they are in different data centers. In this case, internal follower-to-follower transfer in one data center can be far more efficient than the traditionally stipulated leader-to-follower transfer. And in a cluster with massive nodes, the leader can have lower system load due to the less operations in network transmission.

## Detailed design

There are four key concepts of design:

- Every peer in a Raft group is associated with a `group_id`.
- Follower-to-follower data transfer is only allowed for peers in same group.
- Peers report their `group_id` to their leader by Raft messages.
- Leader is able to ask a follower to replicate data to other followers.

### The Group and Groups

We introduce a new concept *group* that represents all the raft nodes in a data center and any node which belongs to the group can be called a *group member*. Every raft node should have a new configuration called *Groups* which contains all the groups as the name is. For example, in a 2DC based raft cluster with 5 nodes ABCDE where A, B, and C are at DC1 and  DE are at DC2, the `Groups` might be organized like:

```
Group1: [A, B, C]
Group2: [D, E]
```

The leader must be easy to know whether or not nodes belong to the same group or get all the group members. Since `Groups` is a configuration that will never be persistent in Storage and is volatile, a raft node exposes the ability to modify it on the fly with the benefit of flexibility on the upper layer.

### The Delegate and Commission

As the `Groups` is configured, the leader is able to choose a group member as a *delegate* to send entries to one or the rest group members in Log Replication, which is called Follower Replication. To implement Follower Replication, we basically need three main steps:

1. The leader picks a group member as a delegate of the group.
2. When processing Log Replication to a delegate, the leader must specify peers whom the delegate should replicate logs to. And the leader never sends raft log to the specified peers.
3. The delegate replicates entries to specified peers based on its own progress.

Here is a diagram showing how Follower Replication works:

```
                                        +-----------+
                                        |           |
       +--------------------------------+     C     |
       |           MsgAppendResp        |           |
       |                                +-----^-----+
       |                                      |
       |                                      |  MsgAppend(e[4,5])
       |                                      |
+------v-----+                          +-----+-----+
|            |                          |           |
|   leader   +-------------------------->     B     | delegate
|            |   MsgAppend {            |           |
+------^-----+     e[2,5]               +-----+-----+
       |           BcastTargets [C, D]        |
       |         }                            |  MsgAppend(e[3,5])
       |                                      |
       |                                +-----v-----+
       |                                |           |
       +--------------------------------+     D     |
                   MsgAppendResp        |           |
                                        +-----------+

```

Note:

- `e[x, y]` stands for all the entries within an index range [x, y] (both inclusive)
- `BcastTargets` is a name list of delegated peers.

#### Choose a Delegate

Since a delegate is responsible to send entries to other group members, it must contain entries as more as possible to complete the commission. The leader follows a bunch of rules to choose a delegate of a group:

1. If all the members are requiring snapshots, choose the delegate randomly.
2. Among the members who are requiring new entries, choose the node satisfies conditions below:
3. If no delegate is picked, the leader does Log Replication itself. Especially, if a group contains the leader it self, no delegate will be set. And the feature of enabling choosing delegate of such 'leader group' can be controlled by upper layer.

If the delegate of a group is determined, it’ll be cached in memory for later usage until `Groups` configuration is changed or the delegate is evicted by rejection message. And the flow control should be valid for any cached delegate.

#### How delegate does replication

We can add a new field into `Message`: `BcastTargets`, which is a list of peer IDs that the message receiver (the delegate) needs to replicate entries to. When a peer become delegate first time, it doesn't know followers' progress, so it appends its last log entry to other peers. After it receives `MsgAppendResponse` from those peers, it can update their progresses.

You can just treat a commission as the metadata of a MsgAppend or MsgSnapshot since the `last_index` and `log_term` are set by the leader according to its progress set.

Peers can know whether a `MsgAppend` comes from a delegate or the leader according to `delegate` value in the message. If a peer receives a `MsgAppend` from a delegate, it needs to response to both the leader and the delegate to sync the `Progress` on them.

#### Compatibility
A node in a group will send its `group_id` in msg and the receiver will update the sender's group info based on it. The leader only picks a delegate when the group info is enough. In a rolling-upgrade/downgrade situation, This can introduce several cases:

##### Upgrade
- If only the leader uses follower replication, it can only know the group info until followers finish upgrading and send their `group_id` so that the leader uses origin log replication at this point
- If only a follower or part of them use follower replication, the leader will just ignore the `group_id` in the msg so no delegate will be picked and origin log replication keeps processing

##### Downgrade
- If only the leader use origin log replication, the case is just like common raft cluster and nothing special happens (pick a delegate, broadcast appends)
- If a follower is downgraded and stop informing the leader its `group_id`, the leader will remove it from the group system and send entries directly to it

By such a design, the compatibility can be guaranteed when nodes in the cluster use either origin log replication or follower replication

## Drawbacks

1. Committing speed could be slow if `quorum` must involve peers in different data center.
2. When handling a Raft message, a hashmap query to get a peer's group and delegate is introduced.
3. When a delegate is dismissed due to networking partition, the leader recovers processing Log Replication to peers in the delegate's group. But the information in `Inflights` on the delegate won't be extended by the leader. Therefore, at that time, the leader starts to send messages with a plain `Inflights`, which breaks the origin flow control. And vice versa in the situation where the leader picks a delegate.

## Alternatives

In the current design, the leader not only let the delegate replicate logs to other peers but also 'delegate's the whole flow control to the delegate. We can benefit from it because of the lighter cross-data-center network transmission between the leader and peers but suffer from some issues described in **Drawbacks** section.

There is an alternative design that the leader doesn't 'delegate' the flow control to the delegate. When the leader sends `BcastTargets` to the delegate, it adds the `last_index` of each member in `BcastTargets` to indicate the peer's progress from the leader's view. In this way, the messaging flow is always controlled by the leader and the `Inflights` in-consistency can be avoided.

## Unresolved questions
