# TiKV's Mission

## Summary

Formalize the TiKV project mission to be:

> The TiKV project aims to enable and empower the next generation of databases
> by providing a reliable, high quality, practical storage foundation. The
> project maintains and fosters the TiKV ecosystem, this includes TiKV itself,
> clients, related libraries, and downstream projects. The project seeks to
> create a collaborative atmosphere of research, development, and engineering
> excellence.

## Motivation

We recently discussed forming a mission statement for our project to help guide
project planning and architecture.

## Detailed design

Mission statements tend to speak to long term (multi-year) abstract goals. The best
seem to speak to a person through their aspirations and motivations. The best tend
to should encompass a holistic vision of ongoing success.

Saying “Be the world's fastest KV store" or "Be the most popular KV store"
doesn’t really meet that mark. It's too arbitrary, too shallow.

Saying something like “Empower users to simplify data pipelines and gain greater
insights into their services” tells much more about a project. It speaks to something
more than just "Build a better toaster."

### The CNCF Mission

We are a CNCF project, which means we are covered by their mission:

> The CNCF fosters this landscape of open source projects by helping provide
> end-user communities with viable options for building cloud native
> applications. By encouraging projects to collaborate with each other, the CNCF
> hopes to enable fully-fledged technology stacks comprised solely of CNCF member
> projects. This is one way that organizations can own their destinies in the cloud.
>
> - https://www.cncf.io/blog/2018/11/05/34097/

Our missions should, ultimately, echo that of the CNCF, but we did believe that
having our own mission could help our community find harmony.

### The TiKV Mission

We can define a mission that speaks to our goals for the codebase, the ecosystem,
and our contributors all at the same time.

> The TiKV project aims to enable and empower the next generation of databases
> by providing a reliable, high quality, practical storage foundation. The
> project maintains and fosters the TiKV ecosystem, this includes TiKV itself,
> clients, related libraries, and downstream projects. The project seeks to
> create a collaborative atmosphere of research, development, and engineering
> excellence.

We can amend and refine this mission in the future.

## Drawbacks

It takes a small amount of time add this content to our project.

## Alternatives

- We may adopt a different mission
- We may not adopt a mission

## Unresolved questions

Where would we share this?
