# Hibernate Region

## Summary

This RFC proposes to hibernate a peer when it reaches a stable state.

## Motivation

There are several ticks when driving a peer. The cost of ticks is usually
small. However, when there are a lot of regions in one TiKV instances, the
cost can be significant. We have observed that an idle cluster with many
regions can waste a lot of CPU time to send useless heartbeats and tick for
routine checks. In an online cluster with tens of thousands of regions,
enlarging the interval between ticks can usually lead to better performance.
Threaded raftstore can ease the problem but can't solve it. In general, not
all regions keep working all the time. Unbalanced load is a very common use
case in practice. For those idle regions, we can hibernate them to avoid
wasting resources and get better performance.

## Detailed design

A peer is driven by several ticks, including Raft, RaftLogGc,
SplitRegionCheck, PdHeartbeat, CheckMerge, and CheckPeerStaleState.
The following describes how to disable most of these ticks when possible.

### Raft

Raft tick is used to drive a raft state machine, so a leader can send
heartbeats, and a follower can campaign when the leader is down. To make sure
raft can still work properly, we can only disable ticks when the group is in a
steady state. From a peer's perspective, a group's state can be defined as
Ordered, Chaos and Idle. Ordered means the cluster is working in normal
fashion, and everyone is ticking actively. Chaos means leadership may not be
hold, and a new leader may have been elected. Idle means there is no writes
for a long time that tick is disabled. We use the phrase like "become/is
Chaos/Ordered/Idle" to express "considers the group is in Chaos/Ordered/Idle
state".

Internally, raft follower will reset elapsed election ticks when receives
messages from leader. So for followers, it becomes Ordered when it admits a
leader and receives messages from leader. For leader, it should always be
Ordered until explicitly transiting to other state.

If a follower receives a proposal or vote messages, it means leader is not
working, so it should become Chaos. Specially, all nodes should be Chaos when
started. If leader receives a vote message, it means some follower is trying
to steel the leadership, so the group state should be Chaos too.

When the group is in Ordered state, and there is no further writes, the group
can become Idle state. But leader needs to replicate logs to followers, so it
should not be Idle until all the active followers have received latest logs
and it applies to latest logs. Note that only active followers need to be
considered as inactive followers may be isolated, keep ticking may not make a
difference most of time. Apply to latest logs can ensure all configuration is
applied.

Because leader only considers active followers, so when inactive followers
rejoin the group, leader may not replicate logs to the follower in time. If
the follower is Chaos, it can use vote message to make leader Chaos too, and
start replication again. If the follower is Idle it may not receive any logs
until there is write from client again. So leader needs to find a way to see
if a follower is active again. So even leader is in Idle state, it should
broadcast heartbeats to all followers in a long period.

Followers can't know whether there is further write, so it can just consider
the group Idle when it contains logs from current term and has a leader. And
then let leader to drive the log replication. And even followers are in Idle
state, it should also check whether heartbeats arrives in long enough time. If
not, it means the follower may have been removed from the group or leader is
down. It should become Chaos and campaign.

### RaftLogGc

Because raft log is done by proposal, so only leader needs to tick. And when
raft tick is stopped, this tick can be stopped too. When new write proposal
arrives or a new leader is elected, the tick can be started again.

### SplitRegionCheck

This can be handled using the same policy as `RaftLogGc` except that when
rocksdb finishes compaction or merge/split is finished, it needs to tick again
at least one time.

### PdHeartbeat

This is also similar to `RaftLogGc`. However, `PdHeartbeat` must tick when
there are any read proposals to let pd rebalance correctly.

### CheckMerge

It has been implemented in the lazy way already that it's only scheduled when
a `PrepareMerge` is proposed while `CommitMerge` is not applied.

### CheckPeerStaleState

This tick can't be removed as there is no reliable way to remove stale peer.

Besides leader has to broadcast heartbeats to all followers in a long period
as memtioned above, so this tick can be also used for broadcasting and
checking heartbeats. To make sure followers check the leader heartbeat
reliablely, we can add a intermediate state to group state as PreChaos. If a
follower is Idle, then change it to PreChaos; if it's PreChaos, then change it
to Chaos. So it takes two ticks for follower to actually start campaign while
it only takes one tick for leader to broadcast heartbeats. So followers should
generally stay calm if network and clock is good.

## Drawbacks

When a leader is down, it may take a longer time to recover than before.

## Alternatives

### Merging small packets

It's expected to reduce gRPC thread usages a lot. However, it does not help to
reduce raftstore's CPU usages. Though it may still be a good solution to solve
the CPU consumption when all regions are under high load.

## Unresolved questions

When a node is cold restarted, there may still be a lot of CPU usages.
