text/2020-01-30-key-spaces.md, before:

# Title

Key Spaces

## Summary

When multiple applications store data in TiKV, we need a clear pattern for avoiding conflicting use of the key space in TiKV.
TiKV is a monolithic KV store, so each application must choose a key prefix.
Key Spaces formalizes this process by registering a key space for an application in TiKV itself.

When combined with authentication (not part of this proposal), this can secure an application's data.

Additionally, key spaces make it possible for TiKV to avoid conflicts when an application is restored into a different cluster by changing the key prefix assigned to a key space.

## Motivation

The use case for this is running multiple applications against TiKV (not just a single TiDB application).
This gives the user 2 potential benefits:
* Reduce maitenance burden by operating a single cluster.
* Reduce cost and otherwise make TiDB more feasible for smaller data sets

The second point is critical for TiDB to be able to serve a broader set of users.

The problem with running multiple applications is conflicting, unsecured key spaces.
* Avoiding accidental conflicting use of a key space in TiKV is currently ad-hoc and unreliable
* Securing data in TiKV against privilege escalation. If one TiKV client is hacked, effectively all are hacked.

Once key spaces are in place, all applications and TiKV itself should understand what data belongs to whom and how to avoid key space conflict.
An auth implementation can then secure the key spaces to provide security against privilege escalation.

## Detailed design

#### Scope

This RFC will not propose "sub spaces", which is a key space within a key space.
This can be proposed independently, although it may be better to discuss after the key spaces RFC is accepted so that it can leverage some of the key spaces implementation.

This RFC will not discuss authentication.
Authentication is necessary to provide any meaningful security for key spaces.

This RFC will not discuss resource isolation.
Key spaces will be an important tool for resource isolation to leverage.

#### Client view

When a client first connects to the TiKV system, it will register itself to get a key space prefix.
The client can register for additional key spaces, but normally one application will have one key space.

All key spaces operations take place in the metadata component (PD) which stores a registry of key spaces.

The TiKV component does not know about key spaces. All requests to the storage component (TiKV) will include the key space prefix.
Please see [this separate proposal that helps with sending key prefixes to TiKV](https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/pull/56).


#### Metadata operations

POST /keyspaces

requires:

* key space name
* application name

optional:

* description

system generated:

* prefix

This API will return the key space object. The key space name is the id of the keyspace and cannot be changed.
The usage of an application name as an identity may end up being a de-normalization of data in a future iteration when true identity with authentication is added.


POST /keyspaces/{id}

requires id and description. Only the description field can be updated.

Addtional GET APIs will also return keyspace objects

* Lookup by ID, key space name
* List all key spaces

DELETE /keyspaces/{id}

requires id. Deletion is background task. This DELETE API sets the time of the API call in a field `deleted_at`.
When deletion is completed, it will set a field `delete_completed_at` and the prefix may be re-used in a new key space.

Note that in a token-based auth system deletion will need to wait until client tokens expire.



#### Key Prefix specification

Few TiKV installations will have more than 100 applications so we can use a variable length encoding that will use a single byte when there are few applications.

The prefix that is generated is a binary sequence.
The most significant bit will be reserved to indicate that there is an additional byte in the sequence.
This is the same design as the [varint encoding used in some protocols](https://golang.org/src/encoding/binary/varint.go).
The binary sequence starts with 0x01 and increment by 1. The 0x00 prefix will remain reserved.

So the prefix will be 1 byte from 1-127 and 2 bytes afterward.
2 bytes can then fit over thousands of applications: (7 bits * 2 bytes) ^ 2 = 16384
3 bytes will fit millions: (7 bits * 3 bytes) ^ 2 = 2097152
This pattern can continue to add an infinite amount of additional bytes but it is unlikely that a real world deployment could use more than 4 bytes.


#### Region storage

A Region must not span multiple key spaces. This helps to ensure data security and confidentiality of key spaces.
PD will need to ensure that region key ranges stay with their key space and that regions from different key spaces are not merged together.

#### Backwards compatibility

Please see [this separate proposal that helps with sending key prefixes to TiKV](https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/pull/56).
This includes a backwards compatibility plan.
If that RFC is not adopted we would likely do something similar in this RFC (but particular to key spaces rather than prefixes).

Otherwise this RFC provides no help with backwards compatibility. Applications not using the key spaces feature will stay the same.
The auth proposal will provide a mechanism to secure access for an application that did not start by using the key spaces feature.


#### Backup and Restore

A full backup should backup all the keyspace metadata.
A backup of a single key space should backup the information about the associated keyspace.
A restore that has associated key space metadata must also ensure that after the restore there are key space metadata entries in PD.

When restoring, TiKV may choose to alter the key prefix to avoid conflicts. A conflict could happen when moving an application from one cluster to another.
Suggested best behavior for restore is to be conservative about conflicts and to let the user handle conflicts:

* check to see if the key prefix for the key space is already in use. If so, this is an error
* the user may instead provide a flag to tell TiKV to overwrite the keyspace or alter the key prefix

#### Ownership and multiple applicatins

The intent of key spaces is to declare an owner of a key space.
There can only be one owner.
This does not preclude cooperation among applications, for example having read access to another key space.

It would be possible for this proposal to attempt to formalize this as well by documenting read-only access, etc.
However, I believe that because currently we have no way to secure access it is better to tackle this problem when we implement authentication.
More specifically, there are alternative designs for this that make more sense when authentication is present, and one that I currently favor is access delegation.

## Drawbacks

The upgrade path is a little complicated and might be confusing.
Teaching users to use this new feature and attempting to integrate it into client libraries will take effort.
key space overwriting is still possible until auth is implemented.

## Alternatives

#### FoundationDB directories

The database I know of that is operationally similar to TiKV is FoundationDB. FoundationDB has had this feature for a long time.
FoundationDB has a tuple layer which is a convenience for creating key prefixes. On top of that, they have subspaces, which is specifically designed for prefixes for key space managment.
In addition, they have a directory layer.
The directory layer abstracts away actual key prefixes, usess a compressed key prefix, and has some hierarcrhy abilities for organizing data.

The Directory layer has been problematic for some users precisely because it is a "layer" rather than implemented directly in FoundationDB.
Fundamentally use of this layer requires an extra database read or the use of a cache that you can't guarantee is correct unless you control the usage of your directories and are aware of backup and restore, etc.

So this proposal is similar to FoundationDB directories, but

* does not attempt to add hierachical organization
* is implemented directly in the TiKV system to avoid network overhead

I believe that if the hierarchy feature is desired it can be added on to this key space implementation.
In a database, it is very important to avoid abstractions that make performance worse, so I believe this is a feature that should not be implemented as a (network-isolated) layer.

FoundationDB subspaces are little more than a convenience in client libraries for using key prefixes.
Etcd namespaces seem equivalent.
We may also want to add such a feature to TiKV clients independently on this RFC.

#### Running lots of TiKVs

Instead of key space partitioning, one could run one TiKV cluster per applcation.
This can work well, and may still be a preferred approach as long as each application's usage is large enough to justify a TiKV deployment.
Unfortunately TiKV is not well-tested for scaling down to smaller resource deployments right now.
Additionally, once deployed on a smaller sized node, vertical scaling is complicated.
It is also possible to deploy many small TiKV on one large node, but similar issues are present.
I can elaborate more on this situation if there is interest, but otherwise will spend my time on this proposal.

Operationally, users may prefer running 1 large TiKV cluster over running many smaller clusters.

But I don't think these 2 approaches are exclusive: we need to work to support both the ability to run multiple applcations in one TiKV deployment and the ability to manage multiple TiKV cluster deployments.

## Unresolved questions

Commit message:

update RFC for changes to key prefixes

text/2020-01-30-key-spaces.md, after:

# Title

Key Spaces

## Summary

When multiple applications store data in TiKV, we need a clear pattern for avoiding conflicting use of the key space in TiKV.
TiKV is a monolithic KV store, so each application must choose a key prefix.
Key Spaces formalizes this process by registering a key space for an application in TiKV itself.

When combined with authentication (not part of this proposal), this can secure an application's data.

Additionally, key spaces make it possible for TiKV to avoid conflicts when an application is restored into a different cluster by changing the key prefix assigned to a key space.

## Motivation

The use case for this is running multiple applications against TiKV (not just a single TiDB application).
This gives the user 2 potential benefits:
* Reduce maitenance burden by operating a single cluster.
* Reduce cost and otherwise make TiDB more feasible for smaller data sets

The second point is critical for TiDB to be able to serve a broader set of users.

The problem with running multiple applications is conflicting, unsecured key spaces.
* Avoiding accidental conflicting use of a key space in TiKV is currently ad-hoc and unreliable
* Securing data in TiKV against privilege escalation. If one TiKV client is hacked, effectively all are hacked.

Once key spaces are in place, all applications and TiKV itself should understand what data belongs to whom and how to avoid key space conflict.
An auth implementation can then secure the key spaces to provide security against privilege escalation.

## Detailed design

#### Scope

This RFC will not discuss authentication.
Authentication is necessary to provide any meaningful security for key spaces.

This RFC will not discuss resource isolation.
Key spaces will be an important tool for resource isolation to leverage.

This RFC will not propose "sub spaces", which is a key space within a key space.


#### Client view

When a client first connects to the TiKV system, it will register itself to get a key space prefix.
The client can register for additional key spaces, but normally one application will have one key space.

All key space operations take place in the metadata component (PD) which stores a registry of key spaces.

The TiKV component does not know about key spaces. All requests to the storage component (TiKV) will include the key space prefix.
Please see [this separate proposal that helps with sending key prefixes to TiKV](https://github.com/tikv/rfcs/pull/56).


#### Metadata operations

POST /keyspaces

Create a key space

requires:

* key space name
* application name

optional:

* description
* prefix

system generated:

* prefix

This API will return the key space object. The key space name is the id of the keyspace and cannot be changed.
The usage of an application name as an identity may end up being a de-normalization of data in a future iteration when true identity with authentication is added.

Normally the request does not include a prefix and allows the system to generate it.
The request may include a prefix: this is designed to support backwards compatibility. The prefix should be encoded as the system does, as explained in Key Prefix specification.


PUT /keyspaces/{id}

Update a key space

requires id and description. Only the description field can be updated.

Addtional GET APIs will also return keyspace objects

* Lookup by ID, key space name
* List all key spaces

DELETE /keyspaces/{id}

requires id. Deletion is background task. This DELETE API sets the time of the API call in a field `deleted_at`.
When deletion is completed, it will set a field `delete_completed_at` and the prefix may be re-used in a new key space.

In a token-based auth system (proposed in another RFC) deletion will need to wait until client tokens expire before it can begin deletion.



#### Key Prefix specification

Few TiKV installations will have more than 100 applications so we can use a variable length encoding that will use a single byte when there are few applications.

The prefix that is generated is a binary sequence.
The most significant bit will be reserved to indicate that there is an additional byte in the sequence.
This is the same design as the [varint encoding used in some protocols](https://golang.org/src/encoding/binary/varint.go).
The binary sequence starts with 0x01 and increment by 1. The 0x00 prefix will remain reserved.

So the prefix will be 1 byte from 1-127 and 2 bytes afterward.
2 bytes can then fit over thousands of applications: (7 bits * 2 bytes) ^ 2 = 16384
3 bytes will fit millions: (7 bits * 3 bytes) ^ 2 = 2097152
This pattern can continue to add an infinite amount of additional bytes but it is unlikely that a real world deployment could use more than 4 bytes.


#### Region storage

A Region must not span multiple key spaces. This helps to ensure data security and confidentiality of key spaces.
PD will need to ensure that region key ranges stay within their key space and that regions from different key spaces are not merged together.

#### Backwards compatibility

Lets call an application not using key spaces a V1 application and one using key spaces a V2 application.

A V1 application upgrades by reserving the key spaces it uses. For example, an existing TiDB deployment would create both an 'm' and a 't' prefix. Note that a new TiDB application would use just a single prefix (it would append 'm' or 't' to that).

A V1 application may continue to operate as normal without reserving key spaces (but it risks collisions). The auth proposal will provide a mechanism to require key space authenticated access.


#### Backup and Restore

A full backup should backup all the keyspace metadata.
A backup of a single key space should backup the information about the associated keyspace.
A restore that has associated key space metadata must also ensure that after the restore there are key space metadata entries in PD.

When restoring, TiKV may choose to alter the key prefix to avoid conflicts. A conflict could happen when moving an application from one cluster to another.
Suggested best behavior for restore is to be conservative about conflicts and to let the user handle conflicts:

* check to see if the key prefix for the key space is already in use. If so, this is an error
* the user may instead provide a flag to tell TiKV to overwrite the keyspace or alter the key prefix

#### Ownership and multiple applicatins

The intent of key spaces is to declare an owner of a key space.
There can only be one owner.
This does not preclude cooperation among applications, for example having read access to another key space.

One application can be an owner of multiple key spaces. This pattern is not encouraged (instead self-management is), but it is used to upgrade TiDB.

It would be possible for this proposal to attempt to formalize this as well by documenting read-only access, etc.
However, I believe that because currently we have no way to secure access it is better to tackle this problem when we implement authentication.
More specifically, there are alternative designs for this that make more sense when authentication is present, and one that I currently favor is access delegation.

## Drawbacks

The upgrade path is not completely smooth: there is a differnce between old and new TiDB deployments.
Teaching users to use this new feature and attempting to integrate it into client libraries will take effort.
key space overwriting is still possible until auth is implemented.

## Alternatives

#### FoundationDB directories

FoundationDB (FDB) is operationally similar to TiKV. FDB has had this feature for a long time.
FDB has a tuple layer which is a convenience for creating key prefixes. On top of that, they have subspaces, which is specifically designed for prefixes for key space managment.
In addition, they have a directory layer.
The directory layer abstracts away actual key prefixes, usess a compressed key prefix, and has some hierarcrhy abilities for organizing data.

The Directory layer has been problematic for some users precisely because it is a "layer" rather than implemented directly in FoundationDB.
Fundamentally use of this layer requires an extra database read or the use of a cache that you can't guarantee is correct unless you control the usage of your directories and are aware of backup and restore, etc.

So this proposal is similar to FoundationDB directories, but

* does not attempt to add hierachical organization
* implements immutable key spaces to avoid overhead from checking for staleness

If the hierarchy feature is desired it can be added on to this key space implementation.

FoundationDB subspaces are little more than a convenience in client libraries for using key prefixes.
Etcd namespaces seem equivalent.
We may also want to add subspaces to TiKV clients independently of this RFC.

#### Running lots of TiKVs

Instead of key space partitioning, one could run one TiKV cluster per applcation.
This can work well, and may still be a preferred approach as long as each application's usage is large enough to justify a TiKV deployment.
Unfortunately TiKV is not well-tested for scaling down to smaller resource deployments right now.
Additionally, once deployed on a smaller sized node, vertical scaling is complicated.
It is also possible to deploy many small TiKV on one large node, but similar issues are present.
I can elaborate more on this situation if there is interest, but otherwise will spend my time on this proposal.

Operationally, users may prefer running 1 large TiKV cluster over running many smaller clusters.

But I don't think these 2 approaches are exclusive: we need to work to support both the ability to run multiple applcations in one TiKV deployment and the ability to manage multiple TiKV cluster deployments.

## Unresolved questions
